#Pivot Grid in Ext JS 6

The Pivot Grid component enables rapid summarization of large sets of data.  It provides 
a simple way to condense many data points into a format that makes trends and insights 
more apparent.  A classic example is sales data.  A company will often have a record of 
all sales it makes for a given period. This will often encompass thousands of rows of 
data.  The Pivot Grid allows you to see how well each salesperson performed, which 
cities generate the most revenue, how products perform between cities, etc.

**Note:** This guide covers both the 
[stand-alone PivotGrid](http://www.sencha.com/products/extjs/pivot-grid-evaluate/) 
download used with Ext JS versions prior to 6.x and the PivotGrid package bundled in the 
Premium version of the Ext JS 6 SDK.  This guide assumes you are working with the Ext JS 6 pivot package.
The following will need to be substituted throughout the guide when working with the 
stand-alone download.

+ All "Mz" namespaced classes are namespaced with "Ext" in Ext JS 6
+ "Mz.aggregate.*" classes are "Ext.pivot.*" in Ext JS 6
+ The `Mz.aggregate.matrix.Abstract.grandTotalKey` of '\_mzgrandtotal\_' is 
`Ext.pivot.matrix.Abstract.grandTotalKey` of 'grandtotal' in Ext JS 6

Imagine you had the following grid panel:

![image alt text](images/pivot_image_0.png)

How could you easily implement a client-side solution that answered the following 
questions?

1. What is John Doe's total order amount?

2. What are the total order amounts by country?

3. How did a salespeople perform in a specific year?

These are the sorts of challenges that the Pivot Grid solves.  Let's take a look at how 
the answers may be visualized.

![image alt text](images/pivot_image_1.png)

![image alt text](images/pivot_image_2.png)

The Pivot Grid is not bundled within the Ext JS framework, but is easy to require into 
your application.  Whether you're working with an application generated by Sencha Cmd or 
with an application structure of your own design, including the Pivot Grid code and 
styling only requires a couple of steps.

## Requirements

### Ext JS

Sencha Pivot Grid works with the classic toolkit of Sencha Ext JS 6.

### Sencha Cmd

Sencha Cmd is not required to utilize the Pivot Grid.  However, using Cmd allows you to 
seamlessly include the Pivot Grid package via your application's `app.json` file.

## Installation

### Using the Pivot Grid with Sencha Cmd

The Pivot Grid is delivered with full source code that is packaged in a way that makes 
it easy to deploy to your application's packages folder.

To include the Pivot Grid in an application that uses the classic toolkit then simply modify 
your `app.json` file in your application root directory to require the Pivot Grid package:

    {

        "name": "YourApp",

        "requires": [

            "pivot"

        ],

        "id": "391a5ff6-2fd8-4e10-84d3-9114e1980e2d"

    }
    
In case of an universal application then simply modify the `classic` key of `app.json`:

    {

        "name": "YourApp",

        "classic": {
            "js": [
                {
                    // Remove this entry to individually load sources from the framework.
                    "path": "${framework.dir}/build/ext-all-rtl-debug.js"
                }
            ],
            "requires": [
                "pivot"
            ]
        },

        "id": "391a5ff6-2fd8-4e10-84d3-9114e1980e2d"

    }
    

### Using the Pivot Grid without Sencha Cmd

The SDK contains a compiled version of the Pivot Grid's code that is available for those 
not using Sencha Cmd.  To include the Pivot Grid in this manner, link the following 
assets from your index page:

    {unzippedFolder}/packages/pivot/build/pivot.js

    {unzippedFolder}/packages/pivot/build/{themeName}/resources/pivot-all.css

Include the following in your application directory:

    {unzippedFolder}/packages/pivot/build/{themeName}/resources/images/

## Using Pivot Grid

The Pivot Grid relies on two pieces that extend the native grid panel - Axis and 
Aggregation.  Axis allows you to determine row and column placement while aggregation 
manages the grouping calculations.

### Axis

Let's delve into the Pivot Grid by imagining the use case we discussed above.  First, 
we'll break the dataset into salespeople and years.  We can do this by configuring the 
top and left axis:

    leftAxis: [{

        width: 80,

        dataIndex: 'salesperson',

        header: 'Salesperson'

    }],

    topAxis: [{

        dataIndex: 'year',

        header: 'Year',

        direction: 'ASC'

    }]

This results in a view like this:

![image alt text](images/pivot_image_3.png)

### Aggregation

Next, we'll set up the aggregation so the cell values can be appropriately calculated.  
The Pivot Grid includes many aggregation methods out of the box.

* **sum**

* **average**

* **min**

* **max**

* **count**

* **groupSumPercentage** - If John sold items in the US and Germany you may want to see 
what percentage was sold to US from the total sales.  The groupSumPercentage method 
calculates the percentage of the current item sum out of the parent item sum.

* **groupCountPercentage** - This is the same as groupSumPercentage, but uses count 
instead of sum.

* **variance**

* **varianceP**

* **stdDev**

* **stdDevP**

You may also provide your own aggregation function for customized 
processing.  The following example demonstrates how to aggregate multiple fields (sales 
and quantity) by configuring each aggregator in the aggregate array.  As you can see, 
we're using a custom aggregator for Quantity.

    aggregate: [{

        measure: 'amount',

        header: 'Sales',

        aggregator: 'sum',

        align: 'right',

        width: 85,

        renderer: Ext.util.Format.numberRenderer('0,000.00')

    }, {

        measure: 'orderid',

        header: 'Qnt',

        aggregator: function(records, measure, matrix, rowGroupKey, colGroupKey) {

            // custom aggregator logic

            return records.length;

        },

        align: 'right',

        width: 85,

        renderer: Ext.util.Format.numberRenderer('0,000.00')

    }]

The above is a simple example to show what's possible.  If you are writing your own 
aggregation methods, it's best to override `Ext.pivot.Aggregators`.  In the override 
you can add your functions and use the function name as the aggregator config name.

    Ext.define('Overrides.pivot.Aggregators', {

        override: 'Ext.pivot.Aggregators',

        myOwnFn: function(records) {

            // custom aggregator logic

            return records.length;

        }

    });

    // Then you can define your aggregate config in this manner

    aggregate: [{

        // ...

        measure:    'field',

        aggregator: 'myOwnFn'

        // ...

    }]

## Functionality

### Sorting Results

When defining a dimension, you can set the following configs to affect sorting results.

* **sortable**: True to sort the results (_default is **true**_).

* **direction**: You may specify whether you want the results to be sorted (ascending) 
ASC or (descending) DESC (_default is **ASC**_).

* **caseSensitiveSort**: Configure as true to make the filtering match with exact case 
matching (_default is **true**_).

* **sorterFn**: Custom sorter function.

* **sortIndex**: You may want to sort your results using the value of another field on 
the record. Let's say you have one field "month-name" with values like Jan, Feb,  etc. 
and another field "month-value" with values like 1, 2, etc.  It makes sense to have the 
results from "month-name" (dataIndex) and sort by "month-value" (sortIndex).

### Multiple Grand Totals

By default, the Pivot Grid calculates grand totals on rows.  You may choose whether or 
not to display the grand total.  Adding multiple grand totals on rows is possible in two 
ways:

* You can listen to the `pivotbuildtotals` event, which is fired by the Pivot Grid.  The 
event handler is passed as a parameter, which contains an array of grand total values 
and the default value.  Each object in that array should have a "title" and a "values" 
array that will be used to generate the totals record.

* You can extend one of the matrix classes and use the template method `onBuildTotals` 
to perform the same logic as above.

The new grand totals that you provide will be styled as the default grand total in the 
Pivot Grid.

    // ...

    listeners: {

        pivotbuildtotals: function(matrix, totals) {

            var dataAvg = {},

                dataMax = {};

            Ext.Array.each(matrix.model, function(field) {

                var result,

                agg;

                if (field.col && field.agg) {

                    agg = matrix.aggregate.getByKey(field.agg);

                    result = matrix.results.get(matrix.grandTotalKey, field.col);

                    if (result && agg) {

                        dataAvg[field.name] = result.calculateByFn(
                                                'totalavg', 
                                                agg.dataIndex, 
                                                Ext.pivot.Aggregators.avg);

                        dataMax[field.name] = result.calculateByFn(
                                                'totalmax', 
                                                agg.dataIndex, 
                                                Ext.pivot.Aggregators.max);

                    }

                }

            });

            totals.push({

                title: 'Grand total (avg)',

                values: dataAvg

            }, {

                title: 'Grand total (max)',

                values: dataMax

            });

        }

    }

    // ...

### Range Grouping

Let's say that you have results for years on one axis and you want to group them as 80', 
90', and so on. You can achieve this in two ways:

* You can define a "grouperFn" on the dimension that will will be passed the record and 
should return the group value (i.e. 80', 90' etc).

* You can define a new field on the source model that has a "convert" function and does 
the same thing as above.

grouperFn example:

    leftAxis: [{

        // ...

        grouperFn: function(record) {

            var dataIndex = this.dataIndex,

                recIndex = record.get(dataIndex);

            if (recIndex >= 1980 && recIndex < 1990) return "80'";

            if (recIndex >= 1990 && recIndex < 2000) return "90'";

            return 'Rest';

        }

        // ...

    }]

### Filtering

The Pivot Grid provides two types of filters:

#### Label filter

The label filter allows you to filter results by evaluating the values generated for top 
or left axis results (i.e. begins with, does not begin with, ends with, etc.).

#### **Value filter** 

The value filter allows you to filter results by evaluating the values calculated for 
each top/left axis pair (i.e. equals to, greater than, top 10 items, top 10 percent, top 
10 sum, etc.).

The filter is configured on a dimension item of the left or top axis.

    leftAxis: [{

        // ...

        filter: {

            type: 'value',

            operator: 'top10',

            topOrder: 'top',

            topType: 'sum',

            value: 9500,

            dimensionId: 'agg2'

        }

        // ...

    }]

For more information check out the filter classes (Ext.pivot.filter.*).

### Buffered Rendering

There may be thousands of records in the Pivot store once the Pivot Grid's calculations 
have completed.  To prevent the DOM from being overwhelmed, you may want to use the 
BufferedRenderer plugin.  BufferedRenderer has been available since version Ext JS 
4.2.0.  In version 5+ BufferedRendering is used on the grid panel by default.

The BufferedRenderer allows users to scroll through thousand of records without the 
performance penalties of rendering all of the records on screen at once.

## Appearance

### Layout

Pivot Grid provides two layout types with the `viewLayoutType` config: outline and 
compact.

#### outline

![image alt text](images/pivot_image_4.png)

#### compact

![image alt text](images/pivot_image_5.png)

### Totals Positioning

The position of the grand totals can be configured for both the left and top axis.  The 
total can be set as `first`, `last`, or `none`.

The group totals will always be visible when the group is collapsed.  This occurs 
regardless of what is configured for the totals when you have multiple dimensions 
configured on one axis.  The same configuration will also be used when the group is 
expanded.

### Renderer

Renderers can be used to style the cell or to format the output value.  To style a cell 
you should define the renderer function on the aggregate dimension.  For example:

    // ...

    aggregator: 'sum',

    renderer: function(value, meta, record) {

        if (value > 40000) {

            meta.style = "background-color: yellow;";

        }

        return Ext.util.Format.number(value, '0,000.00');

    }

    // ...

Using the above renderer, the resulting grid output would appear as:

![image alt text](images/pivot_image_6.png)

You can also define more complex logic in the renderer function.  For instance, the 
below renderer styles the cell differently when the sum is lower than the average of 
some other field on the model.

    // ...

    aggregator: 'sum',

    renderer: function(value, meta, record, recordIndex, columnIndex, store, view) {

        var grid = view.up('pivotgrid'),

            topItem = grid.getTopAxisItem(meta.column),

            leftItem = grid.getLeftAxisItem(record),

            result;

        if (topItem && leftItem) {

            result = grid.getMatrix().results.get(leftItem.key, topItem.key);

            // if you already have the avg configured on another 
            // dimension just fetch the result

            // result.getValue('avg')

            // otherwise calculate the result

            result.calculateByFn('avg', 'some-other-field', Ext.pivot.Aggregators.avg);

            if (value < result.getValue('avg')) {

                meta.style = "background-color: yellow;";

            }

        }

        return Ext.util.Format.number(value, '0,000.00');

    }

    // ...

### Stateful

Pivot Grids may be configured as stateful by using `stateful: true` along with a 
`stateId`.  The state will save all dimension configs that you provided for the left, 
top, and aggregate.  It will additionally recall the state of expanded or collapsed 
groups.

### Locked Grids

You can "lock" left axis columns by setting `enableLocking: true` on the Pivot Grid.  
This allows you scroll **just** the top axis generated columns.

## Plugins

### Range editor

This plugin allows users to edit Pivot Grid results.  Users can double click a Pivot 
Grid cell which opens a window that contains various fields to update.  The following 
types of edits are available:

* **percentage**:  The provided value is a percentage that should be used to increase 
the values on all records behind that cell.

* **increment**:  The provided value will be added to the existing value on each record.

* **overwrite**:  The provided value will replace the existing value on each record.

* **uniformly**:  The provided value will be distributed uniformly on all records.

The plugin also provides two template methods that you can use to pre / post process the 
edit: `onBeforeRecordsUpdate` and `onAfterRecordsUpdate`.

### Drill down

The drill down plugin allows the user to drill down into Pivot Grid results.  Users can 
double click a Pivot Grid cell which opens a dialog window housing a grid containing 
records sourced by the cell.

The grid presented in that drill down window may be customized by configuring the 
`columns` config on the plugin in the same way as a normal Ext JS grid.

### Exporter

The Exporter plugin allows Pivot Grid results export to any Exporter type available in
the class system. The plugin uses the `exporter` package which comes out of the box with an 
Excel XML Exporter.

The plugin adds two new methods to the Pivot Grid component:

* **saveDocumentAs**: If browser supports it then this function will save the exported file

* **getDocumentData**: Returns the export document content

Both functions accept a config object as parameter:

* **type**: This is the exporter type (_defaults to **excel**).

* **onlyExpandedNodes**: Set to true to export only the expanded groups (_defaults to 
**false**_).

* **showSummary**: Set to false to exclude the totals from the export (_defaults 
to **true**_).

* **title**: Set a title to be shown above column headers in the exported document.

* **fileName**: Name of the saved file.

Each Exporter may come with its own set of additional configs. Those can be provided
to the above config object when one of those functions is called.

If **saveDocumentAs** doesn't work in your browser then it's preferable to send the XML data 
to the server and have the server respond back with the proper headers for a downloadable file.

You can provide a function in your Pivot Grid extension like this:

    // ...

    onExport: function() {

        var me = this,

            form = Ext.DomHelper.createDom({

                tag: 'form',

                action: 'url', // this is a URL on your server that receives the xml content

                method: 'POST',

                children: [{

                    tag: 'input',

                    type: 'hidden',

                    name: 'filename',

                    value: me.title

                }, {

                    tag: 'input',

                    type: 'hidden',

                    name: 'content',

                    value: encodeURIComponent(me.getDocumentData( {type: 'excel'} ))

                }]

            });

        form.submit();

    }

    // …

Using a PHP script on your server side, you could do something along these lines:

    // ...

    $fileName = $_POST['filename'].'.xml';

    $fileContent = urldecode($_POST['content']);

    header('Content-Length: '.strlen($fileContent));

    header("Content-Type:   application/vnd.ms-excel; charset=utf-8");

    header("Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=\"$fileName\"");

    header("Expires: 0");

    header("Cache-Control: must-revalidate, post-check=0, pre-check=0");

    header("Cache-Control: private", false);

    echo $fileContent;

    // ...

### Configurator

The configurator plugin allows the user to easily configure a Pivot Grid with drag and 
drop functionality.  

Following configs are available on the plugin:

* **dock**: The configurator panel is dockable to **top**, **right**, **bottom** and **left** 
of the pivot grid (_defaults to **right**).

* **collapsible**: Is this configurator panel collapsible (_defaults to **true**)?

* **fields**: An array of available fields to drag and drop on dimensions.  The plugin will 
automatically extract all fields from the store model when using a Local matrix if the fields config is empty.

If you have custom fields, you'll need to configure each field with:

* **dataIndex**:  The field name on the model that provides the field value

* **header**:  The field title displayed in the view

* any other dimension item config

## Matrix Class

### Events

Most events fired by matrix classes are relayed to the Pivot Grid along with a `pivot` 
prefix.

### Base matrix

The Base matrix class builds the top and left axis items.  It also calculates the 
result for each left / top item pair.

### Local matrix

Setting your matrix type to `local` indicates that the browser will be responsible for 
calculating data.  The Local matrix is ideal for small to medium-sized data sets.

    Ext.create('Ext.pivot.Grid', {

        // ...

        matrixConfig: {

            type: 'local', // default value

            store: 'YourStore',

            recordsPerJob: 1000,

            timeBetweenJobs: 2

        }

        // ...

    });

The Local matrix processes store records in multiple jobs to help prevent overloading 
the browser when working with medium-sized data sets.  You can optionally configure how 
many records should be processed per job and how long to wait between jobs. 

### Remote matrix

Calculating large data sets in the browser can take a lot of time and may cause the 
browser to become unresponsive.  If you are working with large data sets, you should use 
the Remote matrix.  The Remote matrix will serialize all of your configs and send them 
to the server so that you may perform your calculations remotely.

    Ext.create('Ext.pivot.Grid', {

        // ...

        matrixConfig: {

            type: 'remote',

            url: 'http://your-backend-url',

            timeout: 3000 // optional config used by the Ajax call

        }

        // ...

    });

## FAQ

### What is sent to the server?

The leftAxis, topAxis, and aggregate are arrays of dimension item objects.  These arrays 
are serialized and sent as params in the Ajax request.

    params = {

        leftAxis: leftAxis,

        topAxis: topAxis,

        aggregate: aggregate,

        grandTotalKey: 'grandtotal', // the value configured for grandTotalKey on the matrix

        keysSeparator: '#_#' // the value configured for keysSeparator on the matrix

    };

    // ...

    Ext.Ajax.request({

        // ...

        url: me.url,

        timeout: me.timeout,

        jsonData: params,

        // ...

    });

Before doing the Ajax call, additional params are collected via the `beforerequest` 
event (which is actually relayed to the Pivot Grid as `pivotbeforerequest`) or via the 
template method `onBeforeRequest`.

### What should the JSON response look like?

The Pivot Grid expects a JSON response in a specific format.  The response should return 
an array of items for the leftAxis and topAxis and all results for the left / top item 
pairs.  

**Note:** The "id" property is very important.  An id will be generated if not 
specified.

    {

        success: true,

        leftAxis: [{

            key: '-1276511163', // provide your own key but be careful to avoid conflicts with keysSeparator

            value: 'Macromedia',

            // following is the id of the dimension, the one that you 
            // provided or was generated

            dimensionId: 'leftAxis1'

        }, {

            // when multiple dimensions are provided then the result key 
            // should be formatted like this

            key: '-1276511163#_#243243', // use the keysSeparator that was sent to the server

            value: 'Steve',

            // following is the id of the dimension, the one that you 
            // provided or was generated

            dimensionId: 'leftAxis2'

        }],

        topAxis: [{

            // same like leftAxis

        }],

        results: [{

            leftKey: '-1276511163',

            topKey: '34535345435',

            values: {

                agg1: 4345.34, // agg1 is the id of the aggregate dimension

                agg2: 244 // agg2 is the id of the 2nd aggregate dimension defined

            }

        }]

    }

A key called "grandtotal" is generated for the matrix in regards to grand total calculations.
You can modify this naming scheme by changing the value of `matrix.grandTotalKey`.

If used on both `leftKey` and `topKey`, it represents the grand total for both axis.

If used for `leftKey`, it represents the grand total for columns for each topKey 
provided.

If used for `topKey`, it represents the grand total for rows for each leftKey provided.

### How do I calculate on the server?

The examples folder contains a PHP example that shows one approach to server side 
calculations.  That said, you can also author your own implementation in any server-side 
language as long as it returns the JSON object described above.

## Error Handling

If server calculations fail, you can send back `success: false` along with any 
additional metadata information you may wish to process in the Pivot client.  The Remote 
matrix class will recognize that the call failed and will fire the "requestexception" 
event, which is relayed to the Pivot Grid as "pivotrequestexception".  

## Conclusion

The Sencha Pivot Grid provides an ideal solution for gleaning summarization from large 
datasets. Specific fields from the dataset can be highlighted as quantitative roll-ups 
of the complete dataset, which allows users to visualize the dataset from multiple 
viewpoints.  

For more examples of how to configure the Pivot Grid see the examples folder in the SDK 
download.
